[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: And
welcome to "Beyond Belief."
Mitch Horowitz with
us on "Beyond Belief."
He is a well-known
author, and he's
going to be talking with
us about some of his works
and the esoteric principles
that have guided America.
Mitch, welcome to the program.
>>MITCH HOROWITZ: Thank
you so much, George.
Great to be here.
>>NOORY: How many books
do you have out now?
>>HOROWITZ: Gosh, at this
point, probably about a dozen.
I started with my
book, "Occult America."
And I keep turning them out.
It's great--
>>NOORY: And the last one is?
>>HOROWITZ: The most recent one
is called "The Miracle Club."
That's a book on the practical
benefits of mind metaphysics.
>>NOORY: What makes
you so prolific?
>>HOROWITZ: It's passion.
It really is passion.
I am so driven by
my subject matter
that I just find, as I
discovered at one point
in my life, I want to write
more than I want to sleep.
>>NOORY: What got you
so interested in writing
about America and the
principles behind it?
>>HOROWITZ: It started
when I was a little kid.
I was growing up in the borough
of Queens in New York City,
and I was interested in
astrology, and folklore,
and superstition.
And I wondered where all
this material came from
and why it reached so many
people in American life.
And I began to
research it, and I
found that occult and
esoteric principles are really
in the groundwater
of our country.
It's part of who we are.
>>NOORY: Including
Freemasonry for example.
>>HOROWITZ: Oh,
for real, for real.
Some of the founders
were Freemasons--
George Washington, Benjamin
Franklin, Paul Revere,
John Hancock.
The list goes on and on.
>>NOORY: What are
Freemasons anyways?
I always thought they
were bricklayers.
>>HOROWITZ: All right.
It's really-- it's an
esoteric fraternity that
practices ethical development
through the use of symbols
and esoteric philosophy.
They do tend to be secretive.
At one time, they really
needed to be secretive
because they believed
in things that
would have gotten you in a lot
of trouble back in the 1700s.
>>NOORY: Aha, OK.
>>HOROWITZ: But they really
commanded the allegiance
of some very powerful and
deeply substantive people,
including our own
founding father,
and they continue to this day.
>>NOORY: I was going to
say, wasn't this basis
the beginning of the
Declaration of Independence?
>>HOROWITZ: Absolutely.
Absolutely.
In fact, a large portion of
the signers of the Declaration,
the framers of the Constitution,
Washington's generals
were, in fact, Freemasons.
It was a fraternity
that believed
in the protection of the
individual search for meaning.
So it fed in to a lot of
our early American ideals.
>>NOORY: How did they understand
things like the Bill of Rights
in that era, Mitch?
>>HOROWITZ: Oh.
>>NOORY: How did they do this?
>>HOROWITZ: It's
absolutely fascinating.
The Bill of Rights
probably came most
from the writings of Thomas
Jefferson, who was not himself
a Freemason, but he believed
in the individual search
for meaning.
He believed that above all
else in the New Republic,
you had to give the
individual freedom
to arrive at his or her own
conception of a higher power.
>>NOORY: The
Rosicrucians, were they
the same as the Freemasons?
>>HOROWITZ: They
were closely linked.
The Rosicrucians were an occult
fraternity and brotherhood
whose writing started to
appear above ground in Germany
in the early 1600s.
And they espoused many
of the same ideals that
later showed up in Freemasonry.
>>NOORY: Why are these secret
societies so suspicious
of so many people?
>>HOROWITZ: Americans have
never really liked secrecy.
And in fact, there
was a reaction
against Freemasons
going back to 1826
during the presidency
of Andrew Jackson,
who himself was a
Freemason, by the way.
But a lot of people
back in the day
were concerned about corruption
in American life, favoritism
in our legal system,
and they didn't
like any kind of secrecy.
>>NOORY: That sounds like today.
>>HOROWITZ: Yeah, it sounds
a great deal like today.
And sometimes people
look in the right places.
Sometimes they look
in the wrong places.
I think Freemasonry
has actually always
been a gatekeeper
of good ideals.
But because they're private or
because they're clandestine,
people have looked upon
them with suspicion.
>>NOORY: Mitch, what
would the Founding Fathers
have said about the Civil War
and about the state of America
today?
>>HOROWITZ: They
probably would have
said that we have to
turn down the discourse.
We have to start to speak to
one another with less cynicism,
with less sarcasm,
with less hostility.
You can't have a democracy if
we're at one another's throats.
I think they would have been
very concerned about that.
>>NOORY: Well, and
that's happening today.
>>HOROWITZ: Without question.
>>NOORY: If you were
talking to somebody
who is on the other end of the
spectrum, who doesn't agree
with you, or you don't agree
with them, instead of dialogue,
it's bitterness.
It's hatred.
It's fighting.
We've lost what the Founding
Fathers intended for America.
>>HOROWITZ: Without question.
It's the gravest threat
to our democracy.
Now, personally, I have been
friends for about 10 years
with Steve Bannon, who was
Trump's chief strategist.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>HOROWITZ: Steve and I have
different political outlooks,
but we both share an interest
in esoteric spirituality,
and we are friends.
We are loyal to one another.
>>NOORY: You don't
scream at each other--
>>HOROWITZ: Not at all.
>>NOORY: --because you
don't agree with each other.
>>HOROWITZ: Correct.
Correct.
We're friends, and we
build that friendship
on a common interest in
esoteric spirituality,
but there's also a closeness
and there's a loyalty.
And we as Americans need
to start cultivating that
with our neighbors.
>>NOORY: Tell me
about Manly P. Hall.
>>HOROWITZ: Oh.
>>NOORY: Who was he?
>>HOROWITZ: One of
my great heroes.
Manly P. Hall was a scholar
of esotericism and the occult.
He lived and worked in
the city of Los Angeles
for most of his
life, died in 1990,
was friends with
Ronald Reagan, as I
write about in a new book
called "The Secret History
of America."
And Manly wrote a
magisterial encyclopedia
to a cult thought called "The
Secret Teachings of All Ages."
It's been the biggest influence
of any book in my life.
>>NOORY: Wasn't there
a private person
who signed the Declaration
of Independence
that Manly P. Hall discovered?
>>HOROWITZ: Interestingly
enough, Manly Hall
wrote that at the signing
of the Declaration,
the spirits of the
delegates were wavering.
They were worried
that if they signed
and lost the War
of Independence,
they would be killed.
Manly wrote that there was some
secret agent of destiny who
stood up and gave such a
rousing speech at the signing
of the Declaration that
the delegates rushed up
to sign the document,
and the man then
disappeared from the room.
I think the story is
fanciful, but it did
capture the ideals of the day.
And Ronald Reagan was
very influenced by it
because he retold the story
in speeches throughout the end
of his career.
And he used the phraseology--
>>NOORY: Interesting.
>>HOROWITZ: --that came
directly from Manly's work.
>>NOORY: What was so fascinating
about Manley P. Hall's work?
>>HOROWITZ: What was
fascinating about him,
George, is that he produced
"The Secret Teachings
of All Ages," which is a massive
and magisterial book at the age
of 27 years old in 1928.
>>NOORY: How did he
have that wisdom?
>>HOROWITZ: It's
incredible, isn't it?
It's a mystery.
It's a true mystery.
He was extraordinary.
He was not an ordinary man
and that all this material
could have come out of
him at such a young age,
it's an enduring
literary mystery.
>>NOORY: He kind of reminds
me of a Napoleon Hill type
character.
>>HOROWITZ: In a certain
sense, and his output,
it almost like it
belonged to another age.
It was almost like he had
this power of prophecy,
in a certain way, where
something was just
coming through him.
He was a remarkable man.
>>NOORY: You're working on a
new documentary, aren't you?
>>HOROWITZ: Yes, sir.
I am working on a new
documentary shot on location
in Egypt about an occult book
called "The Kybalion," which
was published here
in America in 1908,
and it claimed to be a retention
of some ancient Egyptian
wisdom.
>>NOORY: Is it tied
into the Kabbal?
>>HOROWITZ: It's not exactly
tied into the Kabbal,
but it does retain some ancient
Greek Egyptian wisdom called
hermetecism, and it really
is a faithful reproduction
of some of these ideas.
It's a mysterious
book in its own right.
>>NOORY: Let's take a look at
a preview of your documentary.
>>HOROWITZ: All right.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Humanity has always been
fascinated with ancient Egypt.
Ancient Egypt was
antiquity itself
to the Hellenic civilizations.
And this has continued up
through the modern age,
particularly because
Egypt's language
is a symbolic language.
And even after it was
decoded, so to speak,
by the Rosetta Stone, it's still
retained many of its secrets
because Egypt's traditions were
oral traditions and traditions
encrypted within image
and architecture.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>NOORY: Ah, you had to get a
black cat in that picture, huh?
>>HOROWITZ: It was
just our luck, yeah.
>>NOORY: What is it about Egypt
that fascinates so many people,
Mitch?
>>HOROWITZ: You know what?
that's an interesting question,
George, because the
monuments and the symbols
of ancient Egypt, they have
a magnetic pull on all of us.
I think these were the
primeval insights of man.
I think that culture is
older than we've really
come to understand, and I think
its symbols pull at something
that's very deep in all of us.
It's a wish for connection
with higher forces.
>>NOORY: We look at the
all-seeing eye on the back
of money, the pyramid.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes, sir.
>>NOORY: What's that all mean?
>>HOROWITZ: Isn't it incredible?
It's a symbol that,
of course, comes
from ancient Egyptian
civilization,
but the way it appears on
the back of our currency
was inspired by Freemasonry.
And it's surrounded by this
beautiful Latin expression,
"Annuit Coeptis
Novus Ordo Seclorum."
God smiles on our new
order of the ages.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
There's some meaning here
beyond this, isn't there?
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, yes.
It--
>>NOORY: Is it hidden meaning?
>>HOROWITZ: To a degree,
it's hidden meaning.
The Freemasons believed that
when the American republic was
being founded, it joined a chain
of ancient civilizations going
back to Egypt that venerated
the search for meaning.
And they believe that
was being resumed
with the founding of America.
>>NOORY: With what happened
in ancient Egypt, which
was thousands of years
ago, these principles
still apply today.
>>HOROWITZ: Yeah.
>>NOORY: How did the
Egyptians know this?
How did they know the
principles of living?
>>HOROWITZ: It's
just incredible.
They had a much deeper and
richer knowledge of nature
in the greatest sense
than I think we do.
And the great principle
of hermetecism
was as above, so below.
And they understood
that as individuals we
are reflections of the cosmos,
and the cosmos reflect us.
It's all one whole.
That was their great insight.
>>NOORY: Are there
people today in America
living and practicing some
of the things of the past?
>>HOROWITZ: I believe that's so.
I believe that's so.
I think some of
these ideas have been
preserved within some
of the fraternities
that we were talking about--
Rosicrucianism, Freemasonry.
I believe they appeared
within Manly Hall's work.
within the Kybalion.
And I think these principles
are not lost to us.
They have been retained
today in some measure.
>>NOORY: And how did they
obtain these principles?
>>HOROWITZ: There has always
been a sort of very slender,
thin, golden thread
between modern seekers
and the thought of the ancients.
It's been broken, and it has
been lost at various times.
But some of the
ancient works were
preserved in writings
that were produced
in Egypt in late antiquity.
They were hidden
away in monasteries.
They resurfaced during
the Renaissance.
And fortunately, some of this
has come down to us today.
>>NOORY: Mitch, Egypt has
fascinated and captivated us
since we have been kids.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes.
>>NOORY: The Great
Pyramids, the Sphinx,
the knowledge that
they have possessed.
How advanced were
these people, anyway?
>>HOROWITZ: It's
hard for us to say.
We've only come to understand
the language of hieroglyphs
really in the past 200 years.
We're only getting a glimpse
of Egyptian civilization.
And I think based
on the theories
of the late John
Anthony West and Robert
Shock, who you've interviewed--
>>NOORY: Yes.
>>HOROWITZ: --I think
Egyptian civilization is older
than we've come to understand.
I think we're just on our knees
looking through a keyhole.
We've only captured
a tiny glimpse
of what's really going on.
>>NOORY: And was it
earthbound knowledge,
or was it obtained
from up there?
>>HOROWITZ: It's
difficult to say, George.
These people were just
extraordinary figures.
I haven't researched the
ancient astronaut thesis myself,
but having worked
with West and Shock,
I feel certain
that our timeline,
the traditional
timeline, of Egypt
does not account for the true
antiquity of that civilization.
>>NOORY: Remember,
we still don't know
how they built the pyramids.
>>HOROWITZ: No, we don't.
>>NOORY: We can't figure it out.
>>HOROWITZ: We have theories.
>>NOORY: Even with incredible
knowledge of architecture
and building--
>>HOROWITZ: That's
exactly correct.
>>NOORY: --we can't
really figure it out.
>>HOROWITZ: That
is exactly correct.
We have theories.
We have certain ideas.
The same is true for
other ancient monuments,
like Stonehenge, how the
materials, the raw materials
for Stonehenge, were moved
across vast distances.
We have theories, but
we really don't know.
>>NOORY: Move it, lift it,
get it up there, it's crazy.
>>HOROWITZ: We just don't know.
These civilizations had secrets
that we fully don't understand.
We have to venerate them.
We have to fall to our knees
before these civilizations.
>>NOORY: If I told you I thought
it was sound resonance, where
they basically
degravitized these blocks
and floated them into place,
would you believe that?
>>HOROWITZ: Well, I would
say it's an idea that's
worth considering.
I take nothing off the
table because the past
is really shrouded in mystery,
and we owe it our questioning.
We owe it our study.
>>NOORY: When you went
to Egypt, how close
did you get to the pyramids?
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, very close.
Right up, George.
We went inside--
>>NOORY: Were you
able to touch the--
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, absolutely.
In fact, our director,
Ronnie Thomas, and I
got to go into temples
that people usually
don't get to go into.
There's a temple to the
cat goddess, Sekhmet,
that we got to enter in Luxor.
And we did a ceremony,
which was deeply meaningful,
inside that temple.
It was pitch black
inside, guarded
by a soldier with a
machine gun and a guide,
who brought us inside.
We got up close and
personal with a lot
of magnificent material.
>>NOORY: Do you feel
spiritual when you're there?
>>HOROWITZ: Yes.
Yes.
>>NOORY: It hits you, does it?
>>HOROWITZ: Not all the time.
You know, it's a tough culture
to travel and to shoot film in,
but there were moments in the
bowels of some of these temples
where it would be impossible
to be a sensitive person
and not to feel something
shooting through you.
>>NOORY: Yeah, you
can just sense it.
It's there.
>>HOROWITZ: Magnificent.
>>NOORY: My father
was born there.
We're not Egyptian.
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, is that right?
>>NOORY: But that's
where he was born.
>>HOROWITZ: How wonderful.
>>NOORY: And they
left when he was six.
>>HOROWITZ: I see.
>>NOORY: He's not
with us anymore.
He always wanted to go
back, and he never did,
but it fascinated him to
be born in Cairo where
all this was going on.
>>HOROWITZ: It's magnificent.
You feel something
on a physical scale.
Life is tough
there, but there are
moments where you just
enter into a kind of silence
and you feel something
shooting through you.
>>NOORY: And tell us about
the book, "The Kybalion."
>>HOROWITZ: "The Kybalion"
came out in 1908.
That's a book that has long been
considered shrouded in mystery.
The authorship is attributed
to three initiates,
three initiates where a
man named William Walker
Atkinson, who was a brilliant
and prodigious writer
of new thought in the
early 20th century.
And he produced the book.
He later acknowledged
producing the book,
which is something that we
talk about in the documentary.
And he really created a
compendium, as best we have it,
of ancient Greek Egyptian
spiritual psychology.
>>NOORY: Aha.
>>HOROWITZ: It's a book
with seven principles.
They are straightforward.
They are applicable to life.
And knowing who the author
was doesn't do anything
to reduce the
mystery of the book
because he's really dealing with
material that goes back ages.
It's a wonderful book.
>>NOORY: What are some
of the principles?
>>HOROWITZ: One of the
core principles of the book
is that everything that
goes on in the world
is a kind of polarity.
Again, as above, so below.
So that when you're
experiencing--
>>NOORY: Yin and yang.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes,
yin and yang, that's
another way of putting it.
So and this polarity exists
within our psychology as well,
so that you can actually
reverse negative emotions
and turn them into
positive ones,
as long as you can
identify their opposite.
So fear can turn into bravery.
Depression can turn
into enthusiasm.
Ennui or a state
of low energy can
turn into boundless passion.
>>NOORY: Anxiety
into opportunity.
>>HOROWITZ: Absolutely.
Absolutely.
We are part of a sliding
scale, and if you
can identify where
you are on that scale
through an act of mental
expression, mental wish,
you can actually slide to
the other end of the scale.
>>NOORY: To a
person like you who
is exposed to this
on a regular basis,
has it changed your
views on anything?
>>HOROWITZ: Without question.
You know, George, several years
ago, I wrote off "The Kybalion"
as just being a kind of novelty
of early 20th century cultism.
And then I get back on the
scent trail of the book.
And there was one summer where
I read it five times in a row,
and it really
transformed my search.
I felt so moved
and touched by it.
I realized this book
really did contain threads
of the wisdom of the ancients.
>>NOORY: It sounds like
the more you read it,
the more information
you get from it.
>>HOROWITZ: Precisely.
Because although there are a
lot of practical insights in it,
the author said that he didn't
want to give you the methods.
Through experiment, you had to
arrive at the methods yourself.
Because only then
would you really
come into understanding
them and applying them.
>>NOORY: What does the
title "Kybalion" mean?
>>HOROWITZ: No one knows.
No one knows.
It's sort of a--
>>NOORY: It's not
tied to the Kabbalah?
>>HOROWITZ: No, it's not
tied to Kabbalah precisely.
There's no mention of
Kabbalah in the book.
It seems to be a Helenized
version of Kabbalah,
but he never explains
the meaning of the title,
so another mystery.
>>NOORY: Now, with this
mystery, of course, what
happened to him, the author?
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, gosh.
He was an extraordinary figure.
He produced dozens and dozens of
books in the early 20th century
under pseudonyms like Yogi
Ramacharaka, Magus Incognito--
>>NOORY: Why did they
hide their names?
Because they could
get in trouble?
>>HOROWITZ: Well, sometimes
he liked to dramatize things.
You know, the man
just literally wrote
dozens of books under his own
publishing company in Chicago
called the Yogi
Publication Society.
>>NOORY: Yogi.
>>HOROWITZ: Yeah.
Sometimes he would
use other names.
use French names.
Like, one of his names
was Theron Q. Dumont.
And I think he felt it would
give the books greater gravity
if they seemed to be coming
from the pen of other people.
I think he felt that people
wouldn't believe one man could
have produced all these books.
He was a little bit
like Manly Hall.
His output was incredible.
>>NOORY: Maybe he was
a marketing expert.
>>HOROWITZ: Well, he was
that, among other things.
He was a lawyer.
He was a marketing expert.
He had a flair for drama,
but he was totally sincere.
And he really was one of
the greatest interpreters
of new thought or
mind metaphysics.
>>NOORY: Now through all of
these esoteric principles
that you have
investigated, are there
mysteries behind them, Mitch?
And what I mean by
that are mysteries
that were intertwined
where we had to figure out
what the puzzle was?
>>HOROWITZ: There's no question.
In fact, I think we're
living with a great mystery
right now in our
generation, which
is if our minds are causative,
if our thoughts make things
happen, and I
believe they do, why?
Why should there be
any effect at all?
And I try to go through some
of this in "The Miracle Club"
and at least come up
with a theory of why
our thoughts are causative.
I believe that
everything is going on
at once, that everything
is in superposition.
And we select things or localize
things through our perceptions,
through our focus.
I don't believe we live
in the linear world
that we detect around us, but
that something more dynamic
is happening, which
is why we have so much
testimony of our thoughts
seeming to contribute
to what really happens.
I think they actually
do, and we have
to start trying to grapple,
at least in our time,
with why that is.
That's a mystery.
>>NOORY: What is the
Midnight Archive?
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, the
Midnight Archive
is a wonderful online
series about people
who explore strange phenomena.
It's directed by my
friend Ronnie Thomas.
And Ronnie and I've done several
episodes on the Ouija board
and on occult--
>>NOORY: Oh, stay away
from Ouija boards.
>>HOROWITZ: Yeah.
I've softened on the
question, George.
I've softened on the question.
I won't discourage anybody
from experimenting.
I know there are fearsome
stories around Ouija,
and I don't downplay
any of that.
But there have been
wonderful discoveries, too,
and I don't want to stifle
anybody's experience.
>>NOORY: Well, you actually
talked about the Ouija board
on Midnight Archive.
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, for real.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>> The earliest aspect of the
spiritualist experience was
the sance, people joining hands
around a table in a darkened
parlor and a medium,
usually a woman,
who would go into a
kind of trance state,
and spirits would
speak through her.
But Americans went in
search of technologies
to make the whole
experience easier
and to find a way of
doing it themselves,
to dispense with the medium.
One of the things
people would engage
in would be what became
known as automatic writing.
Somebody would simply hold
a quill in his or her hand
and attempt to go
into a trance state
and write some message
from the afterworld.
But that was unsatisfying
to a lot of people,
because it produced
page after page
of very meandering writing.
The French came up with
an interesting innovation
of their own called
the planchette,
which would allow people, either
individually or in groups,
to take a kind of
little plank, which
looks a great deal like a
little plank that revolves
around the Ouija board today.
Only what the French
did was design
a little board that was made of
wood that was on ball bearings.
And in the center
of the planchette,
they had a hole where you
could insert a pencil.
And it would slide around
and write out messages
from the spirit world.
It was supposed to be easier
than automatic writing.
But again, it could be tedious.
It could be time consuming.
And people seemed to feel
it produced page after page
of barely intelligible writing.
So along came the
American engineers,
and they created
all kinds of things
with different pulleys,
and devices, and weights.
When you look at the blueprints
of some of these things,
you'll find it hard
to imagine that people
felt that these objects could
have made anything much easier.
Now, there was another
development happening.
It was much simpler than
this whole wide array
of spiritual telegraph devices.
And it was something that
was sometimes used at sances
called the alphabet board.
It was just a very simple
board with the letters
of the alphabet
printed out on it.
And sometimes a medium would
point to a certain letter,
and upon pointing to a
letter, if she received
[KNOCKING] a spirit knock
or some sort of symbol
from the other
world, that system
would be used almost as
an occult telegraph system
to spell out words.
Somewhere along the line,
a group of spiritualists
got the idea that you could
take all these innovations
and unite them into one
beautiful, simple, small
object, and that was
the talking board.
It wasn't until
several years later
that a group of
novelty manufacturers
in the city of Baltimore got
together and put a patent
on this object.
And Ouija began to be marketed
as a commercial object,
as a toy, as a novelty.
My contention is
actually that Ouija never
should have been able to
gain a patent in any case
because patents are supposed
to be for inventions, not
for discoveries.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>NOORY: Do you use a
Ouija board yourself?
>>HOROWITZ: I have
used a Ouija board.
Had some scary things happen.
>>NOORY: Uh-huh.
>>HOROWITZ: Some
unusual things happen.
>>NOORY: It opens up a portal.
>>HOROWITZ: It
opens up a portal.
And I once was doing an online
sance with a group of people
at a website called Elite Daily.
It's a fashion website.
And we got the name
and the death date
of a woman who later turned
out to be a journalist, who
had lived on that very
block and committed suicide.
>>NOORY: See, it happens.
>>HOROWITZ: It happens.
Strange things happen
with the Ouija board.
And I know there are
a lot scary stories,
but I also believe
in experimentation.
And I don't want to
discourage anybody.
I just want them to have their
eyes open when they do it.
>>NOORY: We have a friend
named Karen Doleman who
loves the Ouija board.
She swears by it.
And she thinks it's
the individual, not
the board, that creates these
kinds of problems and issues.
All I know is back in my
St. Louis broadcast days,
I had a Ouija board
in the studio.
>>HOROWITZ: Wow.
>>NOORY: Everything went wrong.
Nothing ever went wrong,
but things went wrong.
>>HOROWITZ: Interesting.
>>NOORY: My commercial
computer went out.
We couldn't run commercials.
The board that you control your
audio, the lights would go out.
I wouldn't know who
was on and who wasn't.
It was awful.
I told my producer at the time--
I said, Howard, get this thing
out of here and get it out now.
So he took it out,
walked down the hallway.
Everything went back on.
Computers started working.
>>HOROWITZ: Interesting.
>>NOORY: The board worked.
But he gave the Ouija board
to one of our news guys,
a fellow by the name of Darryl.
Gave it to him as a gift.
He said, you take it.
He said, OK, great.
The next day, Darryl gets fired.
We run into him about
two weeks later.
And we're saying, god,
Darryl, how are you doing?
Sorry about what happened.
He said, you know what?
Ever since I had that
Ouija board from you guys,
my life has been in the tubes.
He said, not only
did I get fired,
but two days later, my
girlfriend dumped me.
I threw away the Ouija
board, and things started
getting better for me again.
How do you explain that?
>>HOROWITZ: Well,
it's very strange.
I'm glad he threw
the Ouija board away.
I was worried you were
going to present it
to me as a gift after the show.
>>NOORY: Maybe.
You never know what I've got.
>>HOROWITZ: I wanted
to breathe easier.
It's strange, George.
It is an object that
attracts unusual energy,
and some people, like the
friend you were referencing,
theorize that it's kind
of an invisible line
to our own psyche and
our own subconscious.
But even if that's true,
what kinds of things
are lurking in our psyche
and our subconscious
if this is what's
coming out of it?
It's a very strange object.
And when I was
growing up, as a kid,
I wasn't so sure if there were
any occult properties to it.
Because I thought, look,
it's got a bar code.
It's in shrink wrap.
It's at the toy store.
It doesn't matter.
Wherever you get it from, it
has some very potent and strange
properties.
>>NOORY: Well, our
agents obviously
were into all kinds of
metaphysical things.
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, for sure.
>>NOORY: Weren't they?
>>HOROWITZ: Yeah.
>>NOORY: What got them so
turned on by all this stuff?
>>HOROWITZ: They believed that
every aspect of life was sacred
and that everything
that was going on
was part of a continuum.
So if you could freeze in
time a certain moment--
maybe you're using
a divinatory method,
like the I Ching or tarot
cards, or something else,
or the stars--
if you could freeze in
time a certain moment,
they believed that you
might be able to discern
everything else that's going
on, past, present, future.
Everything is like a three
dimensional photograph of life.
And in that sense,
you could use almost
any pictogrammatic device
for foresight for prophecy.
>>NOORY: Did they not have any
bad experiences with the Ouija
board, or the talking board,
as they called it then?
>>HOROWITZ: Sure, sure.
Look, I think people had lots
of good and bad experiences,
but we are so hungry to touch
something beyond the physical,
beyond flesh and
bone, that I think
we're very attached to anything
that seems to be a kind of line
of communication to the unseen.
>>NOORY: And it looks like it
was the French who brought us
the planchette, the--
>>HOROWITZ: The French
brought us the planchette,
but it was good, old
do-it-yourself Americans who
created the alphabet board and
finally took this French device
and figured out how
to apply it in a way
that everybody could understand.
>>NOORY: Now the
Ouija board is still
being sold as a game by
Parker Brothers, isn't it?
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, for real.
And for a long time,
Parker Brothers
didn't want to talk about it.
When I wrote my first article
on Ouija years ago, actually
the public relations
person of Parker Brothers
wouldn't get back to me.
So I wrote a letter directly to
the president of the company.
And I said, look,
I'm just a guy trying
to write an article about
this cultural artifact,
and your PR people
won't respond to me.
Two days later, I heard
from the vice president
to PR, who did get back to me.
But for a long time, they
didn't want to talk about it.
>>NOORY: It was a big
seller for them, wasn't it?
Probably still is.
>>HOROWITZ: It is nowadays.
It was a big seller
for many years.
Then it sort of fell off.
And I think they got
worried about the board's
sinister associations.
They got worried about
boycotts and things like that.
But then they licensed
it to the movies,
and these fairly successful
Ouija horror movies came out.
Now they're in love with the
Ouija board all over again.
>>NOORY: I will admit that I
bought one a long time ago.
>>HOROWITZ: Yeah.
>>NOORY: I don't think
I've ever used it.
I don't even know
where it is anymore.
I hope it's not in my
basement somewhere.
>>HOROWITZ: Right.
>>NOORY: But I did buy one.
I did buy one.
>>HOROWITZ: Yeah, I have a
couple of antique boards.
I gave one away to
a friend recently.
I keep another--
>>NOORY: Nice guy.
>>HOROWITZ: Hopefully
he'll remain so.
And I do use it.
I do bring it out when friends
or guests want to use it,
but I don't use it regularly.
I keep it up in my closet.
It's not something I
toy around with lightly.
I mean, this is not
something that I play around
with like a magic 8
ball or something.
I do take it seriously, and
I keep the antique board.
That's my one and only.
>>NOORY: Let's talk about
sances if we can, Mitch.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes, sir.
>>NOORY: They were
big back in the 1800s.
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, yeah.
>>NOORY: They're
probably still big now.
What are they?
>>HOROWITZ: Sances simply
involve a group of people
joining hands or touching
fingers around a table
and using their group
energy, so to speak,
to try and contact the spirits.
It was another American
innovation that started getting
practiced in upstate New York,
and it was something that
Americans exported in the 1850s
when sances began to occur
in the salons of Paris and Rome.
But in its modern form, it
began right here in the US,
and it is still practiced today.
>>NOORY: They
somehow had something
to do with the women's
rights movement?
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, yes, sir.
>>NOORY: How so?
>>HOROWITZ: Back in the day,
most mediums were women,
and it provided the
first opening in America.
This goes back to the
1840s, 1850s, for women
to have a voice in the religious
and civic life of the country.
Sances were a big
deal back in the day.
People formed into
sance societies.
They had their own newspapers,
their own newsletters,
and women who wanted to be
heard could be heard as leaders,
as mediums, at the sance table.
And this coincided with the dawn
of the women's rights movement.
The two movements really
intersected for many years.
>>NOORY: The Lincoln White
House was big into sances.
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, for real.
>>NOORY: Were they not?
>>HOROWITZ: For real.
I read about this
in "Occult America."
Abe and Mary Todd Lincoln
conducted at least two sances
that we know about
in the White House.
They permitted a reporter
from the newspaper,
the "Boston Gazette" to
be present at one of them.
And they did these in the
Red Room of the White House.
And it's absolutely remarkable.
Abe Lincoln was participating
in this occult ceremony
that a lot of Americans
were at the time.
>>NOORY: Didn't he have his
own dream of his assassination?
>>HOROWITZ: Yes, he did.
Lincoln had a lot
of prophetic dreams,
and he had a dream of his
assassination, one of which
involved seeing two images
of himself in a mirror,
and then one of
the images faded.
And Mary Todd interpreted that
as a dream of his own death.
>>NOORY: Now she was big
into this, too, wasn't she?
>>HOROWITZ: Until
the end of her life.
Until the end of her life.
In fact, Mary Todd worked
directly towards the end of her
life with one of the
young girls, Margaret Fox,
who had popularized spiritualism
and sances in upstate New
York.
Mary Todd was a believer.
>>NOORY: So was Nancy Reagan.
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, for real.
For real.
>>NOORY: Huge.
>>HOROWITZ: The Reagans
spent 30 years of their lives
in Southern California,
and they picked up
on the social mores and the
practices of the region.
They were pals with the
psychic Jeane Dixon.
But Jeane failed to predict
Ron's rise to the White House.
So Nancy broke with
Jeane and later became
pals with an astrologer
named Joan Quigley, who
lived in San Francisco.
And she was friends
with Joan at the time
when all this got exposed.
>>NOORY: But Jeane
Dixon predicted
Kennedy's assassination.
>>HOROWITZ: She did.
In 1956, speaking to
"Parade Magazine,"
Jeane Dixon said that the next
presidential election would
be won by a young brown
haired man, very robust,
would have the support of
Labor, the support of the Labor
Movement behind him, and would
die by an assassin's bullet
in his first year in office.
Pretty eerie.
Pretty spot on.
In fairness, I also
have to say, Jeane
made hundreds of predictions
that didn't come true.
But she did get a hit there, and
it made her famous, actually.
>>NOORY: Yeah, after the fact.
I remember--
After the fact.
>>NOORY: --"Life" magazine
writing about her.
>>HOROWITZ: That's right.
>>NOORY: Or "Look" magazine.
>>NOORY: And she was
a pretty big story.
My mother used to
talk about her.
>>HOROWITZ: Jeane
was a big story.
And believe it or
not, Jeane actually
had an Oval Office session
with Richard Nixon.
Not a president--
>>NOORY: Really?
>>HOROWITZ: --known
for occult passions,
but they sat in the
Oval Office together.
She gave him advice on
a variety of things.
And the reason we
know about it is
because it's preserved
on the Watergate tapes.
Nixon was recording almost
everything in the Oval Office
at that time.
>>NOORY: Well, again, she
was the one who predicted
Kennedy's victory over Nixon.
>>HOROWITZ: That's true.
That's true.
And Nixon's secretary was a
big fan of Dixon's, and she
convinced him to have a session
with him, and he agreed.
>>NOORY: You're considered
an occult expert.
Does that mean you dabble
with the dark side?
>>HOROWITZ: I do, George.
I am a believing historian.
>>NOORY: Ee.
>>HOROWITZ: Well, I'm sorry.
I'm a nice guy, too, I think.
And I believe in
many of the things
that I write about as an
experiment or as a seeker,
as an explorer.
Of course, my conception
of what the dark side is,
is different from
what people commonly
mean when they use that term.
I have a code, a sense of
ethics, a sense of honor,
a sense of loyalty.
My wish is to do nothing that
would hurt, or humiliate,
or harm anybody, but I am
very much an experimenter
into the realms
that I write about.
>>NOORY: But why do you
dabble with the dark side?
>>HOROWITZ: Well, George,
I really believe--
I have to be frank with
you and your listeners.
For a long time, I was
on the spiritual search,
and I was asking myself,
what am I looking for?
What am I looking for?
And the simple
uncensored truth is
that I came to feel
after a certain point
that what I was
really looking for
was personal power in the way
that someone like Nietzsche
was looking for, for example.
And I came to that through
my sense of the occult
and through esoteric
spirituality.
>>NOORY: And have
you found that?
>>HOROWITZ: I think I have.
I've never been
happier in my life.
I'm 53 years old today.
I'm doing everything that
I wish to do in life.
I've never been happier.
I've never been surrounded
by a greater group of people
that I love.
I've never had better
working relationships.
I feel I've come to things
that have been very personally
important to me, which I wish
for you and everybody watching.
>>NOORY: Well, you're
not an evil person.
I've known you for years.
>>HOROWITZ: Thank you.
>>NOORY: I don't consider
you to be a bad person.
Have you ever been
scared, though,
dabbling with the dark side?
>>HOROWITZ: In all honesty,
George, I have not.
I have not once been scared
dabbling with the dark side
in my entire life.
And I've tried some
pretty far out things.
The search is very
important to me.
And again, although
I have a strong code
of honor, a strong
code of ethics,
there's almost
nothing I won't try.
>>NOORY: Have you
tried tarot cards?
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, sure, I
work with them all the time.
I do readings for
myself, for other people.
I believe there is a
real strong foresightful
quality to tarot cards, and
I use them quite frequently,
actually.
>>NOORY: What is it about
the cards that seems to work?
>>HOROWITZ: You know, it's
an interesting question.
I've pondered that
frequently myself,
and I think it goes back to what
we were talking about earlier.
It's possible that every
frozen moment in time
demonstrates or symbolizes
everything that's going on.
So if you can use a
pictogrammatic device,
like tarot, or like the I Ching,
or something along those lines,
you can gain kind of a
multi-dimensional snapshot
of everything that's
happening in a certain moment.
And in my experience,
they do seem to work.
>>NOORY: What generates the
accuracy of the tarot cards,
the individual who reads
them or the individual
who is being read about?
>>HOROWITZ: That's a
wonderful question.
In my personal
experience, I think
it's the individual
who reads them
because I will do distance
tarot readings for people,
for example.
>>NOORY: You pull the card?
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, yeah,
I'll pull cards for--
I'll do a simple
three card spread.
And I'll pull cards for people
and communicate with them
over email.
Time, distance, the
person asking-- it
doesn't seem to matter.
Most of the people who get
these readings come back to me
and say, I did experience
something poignant.
I feel you put your
fingers on something.
>>NOORY: Do you pull
one card or three?
>>HOROWITZ: I pull
three cards, and I
look for a storyline
in the cards,
almost as if I was
reading a comic strip.
I might read it right
to left, left to right.
I might have the two cards
impact on the center card.
But I'm looking for a
story within the images.
>>NOORY: What does
the death card mean?
>>HOROWITZ: Mm, good question.
Most of these things
are metaphorical.
If I were to pull the
death card for somebody,
I wouldn't say that
physical demise is eminent.
Most of the time, it does
signify the end of something.
And look, George, I've pulled
the death card for myself.
There have been
relationships that I've
been in that I very
much wanted to work,
and I've pulled the death
card and I've said, look,
you can make
excuses, but you have
to come to terms with what
you're being shown here.
And those relationships did end.
>>NOORY: Or a job or
anything like that.
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, sure.
>>NOORY: It doesn't necessarily
mean your life is over.
>>HOROWITZ: No, it doesn't
And look, you know, I think
that there have been things
that I've wanted in life
that I have not gotten,
and I have been very grateful
I haven't gotten them
because they've opened the
door to something better.
And the thing I was pursuing may
have been ruinous in some way.
So no can be the best thing
that ever happens to us.
>>NOORY: Are you the
modern day Alister Crowley?
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, that's a
very interesting question.
I'd be very
flattered if somebody
called me the modern
day Alister Crowley,
although I would have to say--
>>NOORY: I just did.
>>HOROWITZ: Ah, you just did.
I believe, personally
speaking, I
strive to have a stronger
sense of personal ethics
and a stronger code of honor
than I believe Crowley did.
Crowley was a great man,
but I would not personally
have been one of his students
because I think a lot of people
got hurt around him.
And I don't think he
demonstrated sufficient loyalty
or sufficient compassion
towards other people.
>>NOORY: People
thought he was evil.
>>HOROWITZ: He
cultivated that image.
He wanted to be
thought of as evil.
>>NOORY: Really?
>>HOROWITZ: Oh,
he was the one who
called himself the great beast.
And he loved when the English
tabloids would mix it up
and call him names and so on.
He was a great artist.
He was a great pioneer.
And he was a great intellect.
But he didn't have a
sufficiently developed sense
of personal ethics.
And I think that was his
downfall as a teacher.
>>NOORY: Your latest book is
called "The Miracle Club."
>>HOROWITZ: Yes, sir.
>>NOORY: What is
the miracle club?
>>HOROWITZ: The miracle club
was a group of occult seekers
who gathered in New
York City in 1875,
and their wish was to
explore the beyond.
And they included people
like Madame HP Blavatsky,
the great co-founder
of theosophy.
And they only stayed
together a few months,
but they were very influential.
They formed the larger
theosophical organization
that's so popular today.
And their slogan was one word--
try.
Try.
And I was very
inspired by that so I
named the new book an homage
to the original miracle club.
>>NOORY: The laws of success,
tell us about Napoleon Hill.
>>HOROWITZ: Napoleon Hill has
been a great inspiration on me.
He wrote the book,
"Think and Grow Rich."
And his writing is very--
>>NOORY: That was his big book.
>>HOROWITZ: That
was his big book.
His writing is very simple.
It's very accessible.
But his ideas were much
richer and much deeper
than I think most
people have understood.
And I tell you, George, I
reread "Think and Grow Rich"
once every year.
I love the man.
I love the book.
It's been a huge
help in my life.
>>NOORY: Let's look at
a vintage clip of him.
>>HOROWITZ: All right.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>> And now may I request that
you forget all your problems
and just relax while I bring you
the master key with which you
may unlock the door for any
opportunities that your mind
can conceive.
The master key consists of 17
principles, the first of which
is definiteness of purpose.
Right here at the
beginning of our visit,
I'm going to make you a promise.
If you will decide
definitely what you want most
during your entire
lifetime and write it down
on paper so that
I can read it, I
will give you the master
key with which you
may open the door to the
attainment of your desires,
whatever they may be.
The exact moment when I will
deliver this master key to you
will depend entirely upon when
you are ready to receive it.
This is the first of 13 messages
that I will deliver to you.
Now in each message, I will
describe the magic key in terms
that you will understand, if
you are ready to understand.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>NOORY: Now that, of course,
was Harry Truman playing
the part of Napoleon Hill.
>>HOROWITZ: Well put.
>>NOORY: He looked
just like him.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes,
they did look alike.
And I love the clip that you
selected because Hill really
lays it out.
He said the first point,
the key to everything
is to have a definite chief aim.
It's so vital.
And I could tell you and your
viewers what the master key is.
>>NOORY: I'd love to hear it.
>>HOROWITZ: Please,
I'll lay it on you.
Thoughts are causative.
>>NOORY: What does that mean?
>>HOROWITZ: It means that
your thoughts will actually
make things happen, but only
if you are absolutely focused.
You have to have one
passionate desire that you
want like breath itself.
>>NOORY: It's
manifestation once again.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes.
But most of us go
through life having
a whole mishmash of
competing desires,
or we're afraid to choose one
desire, or we tell ourselves,
we know what our desire
is without really
being frank about it.
And Hill's genius was
he realized all this.
He realized this problem
in human nature, which
is that we think we know what
we want without really asking
ourselves that question in
a mature, and unembarrassed,
and intimate way.
If you could do that-- and
you have to tell anybody
the answer, it's private--
but if you can
arrive at that aim,
things start happening in
your life, and all the tools
that Hill talks about
become available to you.
That's the master key.
>>NOORY: What about
this manifestation?
What about negativity?
What if negativity pops
up, crops up in this?
Does that kind of temper it?
>>HOROWITZ: It can
temper it, but the truth
is if you really know
what you want in life,
not only does it serve to
amp up your enthusiasm,
but it will keep
negativity at bay.
I'm wracked with
negative thoughts.
I've never struggled
with depression,
but I have struggled
with anxiety all my life.
And I've found that when I came
in touch with what I really
wanted to be doing in
life, that anxiety receded.
It didn't vanish,
but it receded.
Having that one
obsessive passionate aim
can do so much
for an individual.
>>NOORY: You have
written that there
is one vital step that's
important to using
these powers of the mind.
What is that?
>>HOROWITZ: It's focus.
It's absolute focus.
It's the law of nature.
If you look at nature,
focus is the central law
that creates force.
Photons of light
focused become a laser.
And most of us don't focus.
We have a wide dispersed
range of competing aims.
Some of them are in direct
contradiction to one another.
But if you can get down
to the one thing you want,
it can be
extraordinarily powerful.
We fear doing that.
We fear it because look, life
does make multiple demands
on us.
We're parents.
We're workers.
We're homemakers.
We're interested in our careers.
And I understand we all
have to fill those shoes.
But the tough, if
transcendent, bargain
that life strikes with us is
if you can choose one aim,
it will open up
extraordinary doors to you.
>>NOORY: ESP, Extra
Sensory Perception,
what does that tell you?
>>HOROWITZ: ESP has
been demonstrated
in laboratory settings.
There's no question about that.
The work of my
hero, JB Rhine, who
pioneered scholarly ESP studies
at Duke University, that
alone tells us that.
JB was able to demonstrate
that certain individuals were
able to pass information back
and forth under strenuously
controlled conditions
somewhere in a way that
went beyond the five senses.
And JB, for decades and
decades, assembled this data.
No one's overturned it.
No one's disproved it.
People won't wrestle with
the implications of it
because the implications of JB's
data and the data of Dean Radin
and other people in
this field are that we
have a non-physical existence.
We are not just flesh and bone.
Information can pass
between us and other people
in an extra sensory manner.
>>NOORY: Did you ever look at
the work of my late aunt, Dr.
Shafica Karagulla?
She wrote a book called
"Breakthrough to Creativity."
>>HOROWITZ: I know the name,
but I have not looked at it.
>>NOORY: She was a dear
friend of Ingo Swann,
the remote viewer.
>>HOROWITZ: Sure.
>>NOORY: And she
was a psychiatrist.
Got her degree from
Oxford University
and decided to change her
entire practice from psychiatry
to studying telepathy and ESP.
>>HOROWITZ: How wonderful.
>>NOORY: That's what
she wanted to do.
She ended up dying
in Beverly Hills
when a radio fell into her
tub, and she was taking a bath.
>>HOROWITZ: Wow.
>>NOORY: And I'm
saying to myself,
I hope to God she wasn't
listening to my show
when that happened.
Thank god I wasn't
on the air then.
But she devoted her entire
practice to telepathy and ESP,
and she wrote incredible
books and research
that it really works
and it's powerful.
>>HOROWITZ: I celebrate that.
I celebrate that because I
think when a lot of us go to see
shrinks, when a lot of
us go to see therapists--
and I go to one myself--
I think it's because we
feel a frustrated sense
of personal power in our lives.
But when somebody can expose
us to methods and ideas that
amp up our sense
of personal power,
our sense that we can
get done in the world
that which we seek to
do, these things that we
consider neuroses begin to
recede into the distance.
I think a lot of what we
consider to be neuroses,
or problems, or anxieties
reflect a frustrated sense
of personal power.
>>NOORY: Have you
had cases of deja vu?
>>HOROWITZ: I have
had many cases of what
I would call time collapses,
where past, present,
and future seem to be
playing out all at once.
>>NOORY: Like you know
what's going to happen.
>>HOROWITZ: Absolutely.
>>NOORY: Feeling.
>>NOORY: It's a weird feeling.
>>HOROWITZ: It's a
very weird feeling,
and it gives you a
sense that time may not
be what we think it is.
We think of this very
orderly linear time,
but that just may be a
necessary device that we
use to get through the day.
It may be that everything
is going on at once, which
is what we understand
when we experience
deja vu, or synchronicity,
or time collapse.
>>NOORY: Well, assuming
there's nothing
medically wrong with you.
You don't have some kind
of tumor in your brain.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes, sir.
>>NOORY: I am convinced
that deja vu is
a crossing over of two
dimensions where there are
two Georges or two
Mitch Horowitzes,
and the one that's already
experienced that event somehow
crosses over, and
you pick it up.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes, I think
that's very well put.
And I think that's actually
backed up by things that we've
seen in 80 years of quantum
physics experiments, where
a particle can be in a so-called
state of superposition.
It can be everywhere
at once until somebody
takes a measurement.
Then it gets localized.
But it was in a wave state.
It was in this state
of superposition.
And that's akin to
what you're describing.
>>NOORY: What are
your new works?
What are you working on, Mitch?
>>HOROWITZ: Well, I just
completed a 12-part video
series about the secret
teachings of all ages.
That's the great work
produced by Manly P. Hall.
That will go up at the
website of the University
of Philosophical
Research in June of 2019.
It's a 12-part
series that explores
all the occult and esoteric
themes in the book.
I just shot it in Los
Angeles last week.
I'm very proud of it.
>>NOORY: And you travel
around the country still?
>>HOROWITZ: Quite a bit.
I'll be speaking in
Pittsfield, Massachusetts.
I'll be speaking
in Virginia Beach.
I'll be speaking in Kansas
City, traveling all around.
And I love meeting
fellow seekers.
>>NOORY: And people love
this topic, don't they?
>>HOROWITZ: They do.
They do.
They love feeling like in a
free-flowing, and intelligent,
and practical way,
they can talk about
occult and esoteric ideas.
Not feel like they have to
put any label on themselves,
not feel anybody's
looking at them strange,
but just have a
grown-up discussion.
>>NOORY: And occult
doesn't mean evil, does it?
>>HOROWITZ: No, sir.
It means hidden.
It comes from the Latin
word occultis or occultum.
And it's a word that
came into practice
during the Renaissance,
where scholars were trying
to figure out how
to refer to all
these ideas from Egyptian
and Greek civilization
that they were rediscovering.
>>NOORY: Mitch, thanks for
being on "Beyond Belief."
>>HOROWITZ: Thank you, George.
A pleasure.
>>NOORY: Fascinating subjec--
ESP, the occult,
and what is really
going on in the human mind.
I'm George Noory, and thanks
for watching "Beyond Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]